### A Note About Models in Social Science

Science is driven in part by curiosity, and in part by our desire to improve
the human condition. Social scientists use mathematical  models and data to
formulate and test hypothesis about how the social, economic, and political
world works. It is good to ask what value these analytical and empirical tools
add to social science, relative to other more qualitative tools. I find value
in behavioral models because they provide a framework for me to make persuasive
normative judgements about policy, and to simulate economic and social welfare
outcomes in counterfactual worlds.

This framework is persuasive only to the extent that our models offer a
compelling story that has some predictive power with respect to measured
phenomena. The fact is that it's hard to write down a well-specified
mathematical model that can describe real-world behavior. A nice model is
intuitive and easy to explain, and yet is sufficiently rich that it can predict
something unexpected or counterintuitive that *actually occurs*. If these
occurrences can be measured across enough observational units, perhaps we can
even attach some measure of statistical reliability to our predictions. I am
more inclined to believe a story when it is crystal clear how all the pieces of
it hang together, and when it can help me understand observable phenomena. I
don't think I'm unusual in this regard.

I *do not* think our tools are very good for positivist scientific hypothesis
testing, or at least not now at this point in the history of the social
sciences. This is because our laboratory is always changing. Even if we bring
subjects into a lab for more careful testing, once we announce our findings,
those subjects are likely to change their behavior! There will always (at least
for quite some time) be dispute about what's the "right" theory, because there
will always be opportunity to identify new circumstances under which a
different theory applies. That said, I do believe it's important to approach
social science from wide-ranging perspectives. The "white labcoat" approach
plays an important role in pushing the limits of modeling and empirical
validation rigour.

As an applied economist, however, my approach is pragmatic: if our models make
sense, and our measurements provide meaningful prescriptive advice, then we are
more likely to be (and be seen as) useful to decision makers. With a model I
cannot prove that I am right, or that another model is is wrong. But I do
believe we're much better off making policy choices using faulty models and
messy data than using models based on inscrutable and untestable opinion.
Models and data at least impose intellectual discpline and lay bare one's
assumptions for scrutiny by others.

One further distinction exists between data-driven and model-driven science. A
statistician with enough data may be able to predict behavior better than a
social scientist who imposes functional form and other model-derived
assumptions during estimation. But whose model is more useful in the context of
a policy decision? I think the answer is (of course!), that it depends. If the
prediction is short run, and the policy change is modest in scope, then
probably the statistician will be more persuasive. If I am betting whether
Amazon's stock price will go up or down tomorrow, I might have greater
confidence in the statistician's purely predictive model. On the other hand, if
I want to know how demand for Kindle readers will change in response to a
change in Amazon's price, or if I'd like to know something more specific like
the *profit maximizing* price of Kindle readers for Amazon, then I need a model
that connects consumer behavior to price, and price to profit. With enough
data, the statistician can of course predict profit, but not outside the range
of prices that are normally charged. This is where a structural behavioral
model adds value. It provide a plausible story for us that provides some degree
of confidence (mabye not a lot!) in taking our predictions into counterfactual
worlds.

If this all sounds rather philosphical, don't worry! we will consider several
specific examples during class where I'll try to make my thoughts more
concrete.