### A Note About Models in Social Science

Science is driven in part by curiosity, and in part by our desire to improve
the human condition. Social scientists use mathematical  models and data to
formulate and test hypothesis about how the social, economic, and political
world works. It is good to ask what value these analytical and empirical tools
add to social science, relative to other more qualitative tools. I find value
in behavioral models because they provide a framework for me to make persuasive
normative judgements about policy, and to simulate economic and social welfare
outcomes in counterfactual worlds.

This framework is persuasive only to the extent that our models offer a
compelling story that has some predictive power with respect measured
phenomena. The fact is that it's really hard to write down a well-specified
mathematical model that can describe real-world behavior. A nice model is
intuitive and easy to explain, and yet is sufficiently rich that it can predict
something unexpected our counterintuitive that *actually occurs*. If these
occurrences can be measured easily enough across enough observational units,
perhaps we can even attach some measure of statistical reliability to our
predictions. I am more inclined to believe a story when it is crystal clear how
all the pieces of it hang together, and when it can help me explain observable
phenomena. I don't think I'm unusual in this regard.

I *do not* think our tools are very good for positivist scientific hypothesis
testing, or at least not now at this point in the history of the social
sciences. This is because our laboratory is always changing. Even if we bring
subjects into a lab for more careful testing, once we announce our findings,
those subjects are likely to change their behavior! There will always (at least
for quite some time) be dispute about what's the "right" theory, because there
will always be opportunity to identify new circumstances under which a
different theory applies. That said, I do believe it's important to approach
social science from wide-ranging perspectives. The "white labcoat" approach
plays an important role in pushing the limits of modeling and empirical
validation rigour.

As an applied economist, however, my approach is pragmatic: if our models make
sense, and our measurements provide meaningful prescriptive advice, then we are
more likely to be persuasive than someone who theorizes about behavior without
stating their model assumptions explicitly and exposing their model to
empirical validation. With a model I cannot prove that I am right, or that
someone else is wrong; I can only hope to be more persuasive in policy debate.
Moreover, I believe that we're much better off making policy choices based on
faulty models and messy data, than inscrutable and untestable opinion. Models
and data at least impose intellectual discpline and lay bare one's
assumptions for scrutiny by others. 

One further distinction exists between data-driven and model-drive science. A
statistician with enough data may be able to predict behavior better than a
social scientist who imposes functional form and other model-derived
assumptions during estimation. But who is likely to be more *persuasive* in
policy debate? I think the answer is (of course!), that it depends. If the
prediction is short run, and if we don't care about policy, then probably the
statistician will be more persuasive. If I am betting whether Amazon's stock
price will go up or down tomorrow, I might have greater confidence in the
statistician's purely predictive model. On the other hand, if I want to know
how demand for Kindle readers will change in response to a change in Amazon's
price, or if I'd like to know something more specific like the *profit
maximizing* price of Kindle readers for Amazon, then I need a model that
connects consumer behavior to price, and price to profit. With enough data, the
statistician can of course predict profit, but not outside the range of prices
that are normally charged. What happens if Amazon wants to go out of sample?
This is where a structural behavioral model adds value. It provide a persuasive
story for us that provides some degree of confidence (mabye not a lot!) in
taking our predictions into counterfactual worlds.

If this all sounds rather philosphical, don't worry! we will consider several
specific examples during class where I'll try to make my thoughts more
concrete.

[See Murray's citation]


### Risk

- How do we model it, how do we measure it, and how does it affect behavior.
- Risk sharing: maybe the earliest institutions
- Risk management: technology vs. institutions

### Productivity

- This is where growth comes from. How to measure and determine where it comes from. There is so much still that we do not know.

### Household Production

- Farming is still largely a family operation. We won't ask why for now.

### Food Demand

- AIDS

### Markets

- What is a "market"? Is there such a thing?
- Futures and options
- Grades and standards
- Spatial competition

### Institutions

- Collective action: DHI, Breeding Associations, GIs, Cooperatives

### Growth and Development

- Ag and growth
- Two sector models
- Rural communities

### Environment


### Food, Human Health, and Nutrition




